---
title: "Tokyo on page and screen"
date: "2019-07-17"
---
  I chose “Death”, and “unfreedom” as this essay’s two themes; and two 
  films are Akira Kurosawa’s “Ikiru” and Yasujirō Ozu‘s “Tokyo Story''. However, I decided to combine “Death” with “Rebirth” in this essay, especially considering the important role these two theme plays in “Ikiru”.  Death is the eternal theme of humanity, countless films, novels, and journals covered the director and authors’  very understanding and own discussions on this topic. Both of these two films which were composed by two Japanese filmmaking masters had chosen death, this such a controversial topic as the theme. And rebirth is the most frequent topic following it, people don't accept one’s entire existence will be wiped out after he is dead. Something rather spiritual and abstract will leave as one succeeds.  Therefore, three themes will be discussed below, technically. “Ikiru”, directed by Akira Kurosawa, released in 1952, the story was about Mr.Wantable who finds out he has terminal cancer and would like to do something before he dies. “Tokyo Story '', directed by  Yasujirō Ozu, released in 1953, the story was about an old couple taking a long journey to visit their children.<br />
  
  The beginning of the film starts with a rotationally moving shot that gradually enclosing the so-called “protagonist” -- Mr. Watanabe, meanwhile a voice-over explains why it would be such a waste of time to describe his life to the audience now. “Why? Because he is only killing time. He’s never actually lived. You can’t call this living.” The main storyline is presented right away, what happened in this man’s last 20 years has been the same as what he is doing right now, what happened before does not matter; however, what is going to happen to this man is crucial. Also from the scene, he is surrounded by piles and piles of paper. It almost formed a wall, and there he is surrounded, isolated, and trapped, like a gear that is forced into a position, he has no freedom.  Later in the film, the voice-over continues with more information, “Oh no, this will never do, He might as well be a corpse. In fact, this man has been dead for more than 20 years now. Before that, he did live a little. He even actually tried to do real work.”. Then, Mr. Watanabe, took the front page of a petition file named “A proposal for increasing departmental efficiency submitted 1930”, to clean the surface of his stamp. 20 years, has turned him from an ambitious young man, into a living dead man, who relentlessly does things over and over just to keep the job. As the actor Takashi Shimura perfectly presented, he has no emotion revealed, his movement is rigid, not even a smile after hearing the joke. He is dead now, there is no Mr.Watanabe as a person, he is a machine; replaceable and functional. He has no desire either to do things out of his schedule, or things that could eventually threaten his position. A mind of a person did not exist for two decades, the body and the muscle took over control.  He has been assimilated into this huge bureaucratic machine, dehumanized then become part of it. “The best way to protect your place is to do nothing at all.”, as the voice-over said. In Between this scene, there was a joke told by Toyo Odagiri. “I hear you have never even taken a vacation. Is that because  City Hall couldn’t function without you?”, “NO, because everyone would realize that City Hall doesn’t need me at all”.An ironic joke was implemented by director Akira Kurosawa. The only reason he served in government thirty years without many absences, is because he doesn’t want them to find out it will run perfectly fine without him. This joke gets you thinking after a good laugh, low efficiency, and inertia of bureaucracy will always make one or two people relatively unimportant.  This hurting but resigned truth could apply to anyone in any “government”, which in this term by the most general way. Not just in Japan, but in every different sort of governments’ existence. Therefore in the next 5 minutes of the film, Akira Kurosawa demonstrated to the audience, how exactly, this bureaucratism creates those “soulless” civil servants, such as our protagonist Mr. Watanabe, and eventually causes the government’s alienation from people. <br />
  
  A group of mothers wants Public Affairs to clean the stinking cesspool and build a park for children to play.  A proposal to Public Affairs was transferred to the Health department, and the Health department transfers it to Sanitation Department, then to the Department of Prevention, division of Pest Control, then to the Sewage department at City Hall, after that, Roads department, then, to the Fire department, then to, Education Department, Deputy Mayor, eventually went back to Public Affairs -- all the mothers have complete a circle in City Hall. All the department finds the part of this event which does not belong to their jurisdiction and just pushes it away. They all know perfectly well, each department shares the same responsibility as the others, no one will do so. Because it is outside everyone’s plan. And that is contradictory to the principle of their position -- doing absolutely nothing.  However, something unpredictable will happen to Mr.Wantable, the predictable death of a dead man. Mr.Wantable knows that he had terminal cancer, he did not expect to live more than 6 months. Of course, people acknowledge the death of one. They always treat death like their mistress, they acknowledge the appearance of her, but always deny it when she comes near to the door. they would like her to show up at the right time, right place, the same as they planned, but when they know the date of her arrival at a place they don't know, the panic begins. So many things did not complete yet, so many strange experiences have not gone through, it’s too early to know the end of the journey.  How ironic this is, a person who lived like a dead man for 20years, he has nothing to desire nor pursuing, he routine like a clock, a machine built with flesh and bones, even like this he did not want Department more ironic, the Doctor knew Mr.Wantable has six months to live, nonetheless, he has insisted that Mr.Wantable only has an ulcer; no need to do a surgery, just take some medicine. Society has turned back to him, the Doctor tells him lies, Mr.Wantable decides to tell his son, happened to count their discussion of taking his retirement money to buy a house, and it could not have ended up worse. He remembers all the sacrifices he did for his son, wife passed away young, he stayed single, worked relentlessly, did not even date anyone since. He rushes upstairs to try to explain everything, but he stops. Stand there menially, lonely and hopeless taking over as the black curtain merging with his back.  The family now is not an option either. At last, he met a stranger, whose petty he never lived once. “Tonight it will be my pleasure to act as your Mephistopheles. A good Mephistopheles who seek no reward. ” As the delightful jazz music plays, they start seeking pleasure. Gambling, drinking, dancing, and even having an affair with a hooker. In this series, Mr.Wantable sings a song,” Life is Brief”. When the hype disappears, and everything settles down. Stranger feels guilty, he just wasted a few of this poor dead man’s last hours. He did not let this man relive again, he might compensate for the joy he lost years ago, but they were still chained to desire and lust like animals, this is not living at all. <br />
  
  As an audience, just followed an hour and half dull, empty, slowly and lengthy lenses, til now, Mr.Wantable is still dead, but only inspired by a spark of willingness to live again. He starting approaches Toyo Odagiri, her charm, attitude, caring, let Mr.Wantable feel alive. But the relationship is unclear and damaging, for both sides. Mr.Wantable is a drowning man, he tries to grab every single thing that could rescue him, and now Miss Odagiri gives him the last hope. He never lived once in the past twenty years, why would he fairly accept his death? He was drawn towards her like a Moth seeking light.  “In other words, why are you so incredibly alive? You’re just so alive. That’s why I am envious. This old mummy envies you. Before I die, I want to live just one day as you do…I just have to find the will. There is something I can do”  He leaves the cafeteria with “Happy birthday” singing in the background. Akira Kurosawa is celebrating one’s rebirth. When he truly lived as he wished, his rebirth is carefully presented to the audience after his death. The last half screenplay is warped in layers of layers lies before it reaches the heartbreaking truth. Mr.Wantable did not just take by bureaucracy machine, he fought back in the last moments of his life, and everyone in the CIty Hall knows the truth -- Mr.Wantable build the park, and that’s it. As a part of this useless, huge machine, he did something meaningful, he contributes something to the mothers and children. At his own funeral, Deputy Mayor tries to steal the achievement, the journalists fought back. When all the employee in his department says “Mr.Wantable did not build the park”, but facts and truth they knew to break those lies again and again. “He does not know he has cancer”,” He did not put that much effort into it either”,” Some decision is not even up to him decide”. How discreet to say such words in front of one's funeral. But eventually, layer by layer, the lies break down by truth. These bureaucracy gears finally put their heads down to Mr.Wantable. He did absolutely everything at the end of his life to serve people. He fought his boss, he begged help from juniors, he dealt with life-threatening with a smile, he gained not only respect for that, but fear as well. He oversees the progress of construction with a broken body. In the end, he swings and sings “life is brief” again as he feels approaching the density of the journey. He never feels so alive and free. When Mr.Wantable singing while swinging under snow, the shot is the most beautiful scene I have ever seen. <br />
  “Tokyo Story”, the trip started with a neighbor’s greeting, it ended a neighbor’s greeting, but with one less person. The enormous amount of sadness has put into the conversation, “You must feel lonely with them all gone. It was so sudden, isn't it? Absolutely. You’ll feel lonely” When the parents become the burden of their children when they are alive, and children could not serve parents as their obligation after they are dead. It is always too late to do anything after one’s death. People just have to bear with that regard with sadness, keep rolling forward, eventually, time will cure everything, only a light scare will be left for reminding.  <br />
  
  Everyone has that one day of their lives, some kicks in along with a sense of tiredness. Comfortable, powerless just like a nap; others may suffer longer, months, maybe even years. Just to live a little longer, enjoy the pleasure and beauty of surviving, living, and being loved. These two masterpieces have both covered death, unfreedom of the society. Most importantly, the sense of loneliness conducted through every shot is as profound as their screenplay. They are all ordinary people with ordinary stories there is no saving the world, no violence, not even sex. They built stories by the purest and most delicate human emotion, love, to present to the audience. Both of these stories just happened to carry on after one’s death, which one’s wish was inspired by the most primal fear of humankind. Death and freedom <br />


<iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/wTMckp_HQr0" title="YouTube video player" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture" allowfullscreen></iframe>